---
layout: talk
when: 13 January 2023 17:00
speaker: Büşra Sert
title:  An Algorithm for Testing the Half-plane Property of Matroids
affiliation: TU Dresden
slides:
---
For each hyperbolic polynomial $h$, there is an associated closed convex
cone called the hyperbolicity cone of $h$. A convex cone is called
spectrahedral if it can be described by linear matrix inequalities.
Spectrahedral cones can be described as hyperbolicity cones of some
hyperbolic polynomials. Whether the other direction is true, however, is
an open question. This is the question the generalized Lax conjecture
considers and posits.

Choe et al. in 2004 showed that the support of every homogeneous
multiaffine polynomial with the half-plane property (such a polynomial
is hyperbolic) is the collection of bases of some matroid $M$. In search
of potential counter-examples, this connection made finding matroids
with the half-plane property of new interest. For example, Brändén used
the structure of matroids to produce counter-examples for a stronger
version of the conjecture.

In this talk, we present an algorithm for testing the half-plane
property of matroids. The tests are performed by checking some criteria
on the Rayleigh differences of the basis generating polynomials, given
by Brändén and Wagner-Wei, using the packages ``SumsOfSquares'',
``Matroids'' for Macaulay2, and the Julia package ``Homotopy
Continuation.jl''. Using this algorithm, we give a complete
classification of matroids on at most $8$ elements with respect to the
half-plane property, and provide our test results on matroids on $9$
elements.
